## Google Data Analytics Capstone Project: Bellabeat Case Study

**Author: Arthur Powell**

**Date: July 28, 2024**
#

## INTRODUCTION

This is the capstone project for the Google Data Analytics Professional certificate.  In this case study I am a junior data analyst working on the marketing analyst team at Bellabeat.  This project applies the six steps of the data analysis process (Ask, Prepare, Process, Analyze, Share, and Act).  It can be viewed on GitHub.

# ABOUT THE COMPANY

Founded in 2013 by Urška Sršen and Sandro Mur.  Bellabeat is a pioneer in the Fem-tech industry.  They are a high-tech manufacturer of health-focused products for women. They provide women with wearable technology for personalized wellness solutions aligned with their cycles.  

Their products include:
-	 Bellabeat app – The Bellabeat app provides users with health data related to their activity, sleep, stress, menstrual cycle, and mindfulness habits.  This data can help users better understand their current habits and make healthy decisions.  The Bellabeat app connects to their line of smart wellness products.
-	Leaf – Bellabeat’s classic wellness tracker can be worn as a bracelet, necklace, or clip.  The Leaf tracker connects to the Bellabeat app to track activity, sleep, and stress.
-	Time – This wellness watch combines the timeless look of a classic timepiece with smart technology to track user activity, sleep, and stress.  The Time watch connects to the Bellabeat app to provide you with insights into your daily wellness.
-	Spring – This is a water bottle that tracks daily water intake using smart technology to ensure that you are appropriately hydrated throughout the day.  The Spring bottle connects to the Bellabeat app to track your hydration levels. 
-	Bellabeat membership – Bellabeat also offers a subscription-based membership program for users.  Membership gives users 24/7 access to fully personalized guidance on nutrition, activity, sleep, health and beauty, and mindfulness based on their lifestyle and goals.

**STAKEHOLDERS**

-	Urška Sršen – Bellabeat’s cofounder and Chief Creative Officer
-	Sandro Mur – Mathematician and Bellabeat’s cofounder, key member of Bellabeat executive team
-	Bellabeat marketing analytics team – A team of data analysts responsible for collecting, analyzing, and reporting data that helps guide Bellabeat’s marketing strategy.

## ASK

## Business Task: Analyze smart device usage data to gain insights into how consumers are using non-Bellabeat smart devices and help guide the marketing strategy to reveal more opportunities for Bellabeat to grow as a global player.

**Guiding questions:**
1.	 What are some trends in smart device usage?
2.	How could these trends apply to Bellabeat customers?
3.	How could these trends help influence Bellabeat marketing Strategy?

## PREPARE

The dataset that will be used will be the Fitbit Fitness Tacker Data (License CCO: Public Domain, dataset made available through Mobius).  According to the dataset information available on Zenodo.org, these datasets were generated by respondents to a distributed survey via Amazon Mechanical Turk by 03.12.2016-05.12.2016  This Kaggle data set contains personal fitness tracker from thirty eligible Fitbit users consented to the submission of personal tracker data, including minute-level output for physical activity, heart rate, and sleep monitoring.  It includes information about daily activity, steps, and heart rate that can be used to explore users’ habits.  

The public dataset is organized into 18 CSV files with different data represented in each file.  The data was collected from only 30 users, so there might be some sampling bias and no information is available about the demographics of the users.  But we can still analyze the dataset and gleam information on how the users use their smart devices to help Bellabeat develop growth opportunities.

I used the ROCCC approach to assess my dataset.  ROCCC stands for Reliable, Original, Comprehensive, Current and Cites.

**Reliable:  the dataset was collected from 30 Fitbit users from a distributed survey via Amazon Mechanical Turk.  The dataset is limited due to the small sample size and there is no demographic information.

**Original:  the dataset is from 30 Fitbit users who agreed to a personal tracker, third-party collecting their data, Amazon Mechanical Turk.

**Comprehensive:  the dataset contains information about daily activity, calories, steps, heart rate and sleep. 

**Current:  the dataset is over 8 years old (March 2016 to May 2016) which is certainly not current and may be different as to how current users use their Fitbits smart devices.

**Cited:  the dataset is well documented, (CC0: Public Domain).

We will use Microsoft Excel and R Studio Cloud (PositCloud) to process the data.


## PROCESS

I began by installing packages and uploading the files to R Studio.  Next, I cleaned and formatted the data.  Lastly, I established a working directory.

### Installing Packages:
> install.packages("tidyverse")
> install.packages("skimr")
> install.packages("janitor")
> install.packages("here")

> library(tidyverse)
> library(here)
> library(skimr)
> library(janitor)
> library(ggplot2)
> library(readr)
> library(lubridate)
> library(knitr)
> library(dplyr)
```

Importing Data and taking a quick glance at the data:

```
> calories <- read_csv("Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16/dailyCalories_merged.csv")
Rows: 940 Columns: 3                                                                 
── Column specification ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
Delimiter: ","
chr (1): ActivityDay
dbl (2): Id, Calories

ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

```
> head(calories)
# A tibble: 6 × 3
          Id ActivityDay Calories
       <dbl> <chr>          <dbl>
1 1503960366 4/12/2016       1985
2 1503960366 4/13/2016       1797
3 1503960366 4/14/2016       1776
4 1503960366 4/15/2016       1745
5 1503960366 4/16/2016       1863
6 1503960366 4/17/2016       1728




> steps <- read_csv("Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16/dailySteps_merged.csv")
Rows: 940 Columns: 3                                                                 
── Column specification ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
Delimiter: ","
chr (1): ActivityDay
dbl (2): Id, StepTotal

ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

head(steps)
# A tibble: 6 × 3
          Id ActivityDay StepTotal
       <dbl> <chr>           <dbl>
1 1503960366 4/12/2016       13162
2 1503960366 4/13/2016       10735
3 1503960366 4/14/2016       10460
4 1503960366 4/15/2016        9762
5 1503960366 4/16/2016       12669
6 1503960366 4/17/2016        9705



> sleep <- read_csv("Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16/sleepDay_merged.csv")
Rows: 413 Columns: 5                                                                 
── Column specification ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
Delimiter: ","
chr (1): SleepDay
dbl (4): Id, TotalSleepRecords, TotalMinutesAsleep, TotalTimeInBed

ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

head(sleep)
# A tibble: 6 × 5
          Id SleepDay             TotalSleepRecords TotalMinutesAsleep TotalTimeInBed
       <dbl> <chr>                            <dbl>              <dbl>          <dbl>
1 1503960366 4/12/2016 12:00:00 …                 1                327            346
2 1503960366 4/13/2016 12:00:00 …                 2                384            407
3 1503960366 4/15/2016 12:00:00 …                 1                412            442
4 1503960366 4/16/2016 12:00:00 …                 2                340            367
5 1503960366 4/17/2016 12:00:00 …                 1                700            712
6 1503960366 4/19/2016 12:00:00 …                 1                304            320

weight <- read_csv("Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16/weightLogInfo_merged.csv")
Rows: 67 Columns: 8                                                                  
── Column specification ─────────────────────────────────────────────────────────────
Delimiter: ","
chr (1): Date
dbl (6): Id, WeightKg, WeightPounds, Fat, BMI, LogId
lgl (1): IsManualReport

ℹ Use `spec()` to retrieve the full column specification for this data.
ℹ Specify the column types or set `show_col_types = FALSE` to quiet this message.

head(weight)
# A tibble: 6 × 8
          Id Date            WeightKg WeightPounds   Fat   BMI IsManualReport   LogId
       <dbl> <chr>              <dbl>        <dbl> <dbl> <dbl> <lgl>            <dbl>
1 1503960366 5/2/2016 11:59…     52.6         116.    22  22.6 TRUE           1.46e12
2 1503960366 5/3/2016 11:59…     52.6         116.    NA  22.6 TRUE           1.46e12
3 1927972279 4/13/2016 1:08…    134.          294.    NA  47.5 FALSE          1.46e12
4 2873212765 4/21/2016 11:5…     56.7         125.    NA  21.5 TRUE           1.46e12
5 2873212765 5/12/2016 11:5…     57.3         126.    NA  21.7 TRUE           1.46e12
6 4319703577 4/17/2016 11:5…     72.4         160.    25  27.5 TRUE           1.46e12


FORMATTING THE DATE TIME
Using POSIXct to format the date/time.  POSIXct’s main function is to convert a character string to a POSIXct date time object. 

# sleep
> sleep$SleepDay=as.POSIXct(sleep$SleepDay, format="%m/%d/%Y %I:%M:%S %p", tz=Sys.timezone())
> sleep$date <- format(sleep$SleepDay, format = "%m/%d/%y")

> # steps
> steps$ActivityDay=as.POSIXct(steps$ActivityDay, format="%m/%d/%Y", tz=Sys.timezone())
> steps$date <- format(steps$ActivityDay, format = "%m/%d/%y")


# Check for missing values
> sum(is.na(calories))
[1] 0
> sum(is.na(steps))
[1] 0
> sum(is.na(sleep))
[1] 0

# Check for duplicates
> sum(duplicated(calories))
[1] 0
> sum(duplicated(steps))
[1] 0
> sum(duplicated(sleep))
[1] 3

# Remove duplicates and NA from Sleep table
sleep <- sleep %>% 
  distinct() %>% 
  drop_na()

# Check duplicates were removed from table
> sum(duplicated(sleep))
[1] 0


# Established the working directory
> setwd("/cloud/project/Fitabase Data 4.12.16-5.12.16")



Guiding questions:
•	What tools are you choosing and why?
I am using R Studio and Microsoft Excel for data cleaning, transformation and visualization. 
•	Have you ensured your data’s integrity?
The Fitbit Fitness Tracker Data was collected by Fitbit users who consented to the submission of their personal tracker data.  The integrity or accuracy of the data cannot be verified.  
•	What steps have you taken to ensure that your data is clean?
Duplicates and NA´s were cleaned, formatted and date/time was converted.
•	How can you verify that your data is clean and ready to analyze?
The data was cleaned and verified using cleaning functions shown above.
•	Have you documented your cleaning process so you can review and share those results?
I used R Markdown in Posit Cloud R Studio.



ANALYZE

In analyzing the data, I first looked at the number of participants and then summarized the data frames.


Identified the number of users
> n_distinct(sleep$Id)
[1] 24
> n_distinct(steps$Id)
[1] 33
> n_distinct(calories$Id)
[1] 33
> n_distinct(weight$Id)
[1] 8

You can see that 33 participants provided data for steps and calories and 24 provided data for sleep, and only 8 for weight.


SUMMARY OF CALORIES
# Summary of calories
> calories %>%
+   select(Calories) %>%
+   summary()

    Calories   
 Min.   :   0  
 1st Qu.:1828  
 Median :2134  
 Mean   :2304  
 3rd Qu.:2793  
 Max.   :4900  

Observation for calories.  The average number of calories burned per day by the participants was 2304.  This information along with the Resting Metabolic Rate can help the participants understand how many calories they need to burn per day to decrease their weight if that is a goal for them.  

SUMMARY OF STEPS
# Summary of steps
# steps
> steps %>%
+   select(StepTotal) %>%
+   summary()

   StepTotal    
 Min.   :    0  
 1st Qu.: 3790  
 Median : 7406  
 Mean   : 7638  
 3rd Qu.:10727  
 Max.   :36019  

Observation for steps.  The average number of steps taken per day by the participants was 7638.  A June 2023 Healthline article suggests about 10,000 steps to help reduce mortality.    However, a 2022 National Institutes of Health article suggests 8000 steps per day to reduce risk of death by 50 percent and 10,000 steps per day reduce the risk of death by 61 percent.  

SUMMARY OF SLEEP
# Summary of sleep
> # sleep
> sleep %>%
+   select(TotalMinutesAsleep) %>%
+   summary()

 TotalMinutesAsleep
 Min.   : 58.0     
 1st Qu.:361.0     
 Median :433.0     
 Mean   :419.5     
 3rd Qu.:490.0     
 Max.   :796.0

Observation for sleep.  The average number of minutes for sleep was 419.  That is almost seven hours of sleep.  This falls into the amount recommended by health professionals.  The recommended amount of sleep per day is at least seven hours according to the Center for Disease Control and Prevention,(CDC).


Merging Data
There is one transformation of the data I needed to make before visualizing it.  I need to merge two of the datasets. I will inner join the steps and sleep datasets on columns Id and date.
# Merge Steps and Sleep data
> merged_data <- merge(sleep, steps, by = c('Id', 'date'))
> head(merged_data)

          Id     date   SleepDay TotalSleepRecords TotalMinutesAsleep TotalTimeInBed
1 1503960366 04/12/16 2016-04-12                 1                327            346
2 1503960366 04/13/16 2016-04-13                 2                384            407
3 1503960366 04/15/16 2016-04-15                 1                412            442
4 1503960366 04/16/16 2016-04-16                 2                340            367
5 1503960366 04/17/16 2016-04-17                 1                700            712
6 1503960366 04/19/16 2016-04-19                 1                304            320
  ActivityDay StepTotal
1  2016-04-12     13162
2  2016-04-13     10735
3  2016-04-15      9762
4  2016-04-16     12669
5  2016-04-17      9705
6  2016-04-19     15506



Guiding questions:
•	How should you organize your data to perform analysis on it?
I focused on three datasets, calories, steps, and sleep.  I merged Step and Sleep data by Id and date using an inner join, and I verified no NA’s and removed 3 duplicates.     
•	Has your data been properly formatted? Yes.
•	What surprises did you discover in the data?  I was surprised that more users did not track their weight.  
•	What trends or relationships did you find in the data?
For a positive trend, the increase in the number of daily steps equaled an increase in the number of calories burned per day.  
•	How will these insights help answer your business questions?
These insights show how Fitbit users use their smart-devices and some trends that Bellabeat can pursue and capitalize on. 

SHARE

Calories burned for every step taken.

Below we see a positive correlation between calories burned and the number of steps taken per day.  We can see zero steps taken equals zero calories burned, but most fall on the smooth line with more steps taken equaling more calories burned per day.  

## Examine the correlation between Total Steps and Calories burned ##

> ggplot(data = activity) +
+    geom_point(mapping = aes(x = TotalSteps, y = Calories)) +
+    geom_smooth(mapping = aes(x = TotalSteps, y = Calories))

## Plotted this:
 

Do Steps taken equal an increase in sleep?

The scatter plot below does not look like a correlation; however, this can suggest to the user that more steps equal the need for greater recovery time to optimize performance.  

## Examine relationship between steps and sleep

ggplot(data = merged_data, aes(x = StepTotal, y = TotalMinutesAsleep)) + geom_point() + geom_smooth() + labs(title = "Total Steps vs. Total Sleep")

## Plotted this:
 



ACT

My recommendations
1.	Calories and Steps.  As mentioned above, the number of steps taken per day was 7638 and the number of calories burned was 2308.  Bellabeat could send out motivating reminders to users to reach their step goals or the CDC suggested step count for that day. The more steps, the more calories burned which equals a decrease in mortality.   This is important for all individuals trying to achieve a healthy lifestyle.  
2.	Sleep and Stress on the App. Getting enough sleep plays a vital role in overall health.  Recovery plays an important role in optimized performance.  Whether one is training for an event, or employed in a strenuous work environment, getting adequate sleep is so important for body and mind.  Bellabeat could add additional functionality to create sleeping habits reminding users to decrease screen time and automatically change the phone to blue-blocking light at a specified number of hours before bed. Stress reduction is an avenue to pursue with added functions on the Bellabeat app to assist with the sleep hygiene.
3.	Body Weight.  When I cleaned the data, I noticed that there were only eight users that provided weight data.  I did not use this information because I thought the sample size was too low to provide any insights or recommendations.  However, if the sample size was small because users did not take the time to step on the scale and input the results manually then there is an opportunity to market.  Bellabeat could market a Bluetooth connected body weight scale to track Bellabeat’s female clientele’s weight. It would be hands free and they would just need to step on the scale.
Thank you for viewing the project.
.  
References:

Lindberg, Sara. “How Many Steps Do I Need a Day?” Healthline, 1 June 2023, www.healthline.com/health/how-many-steps-a-day.

“Number of steps per day more important than step intensity.” National Institutes of Health (NIH), 7 Apr. 2020, www.nih.gov/news-events/nih-research-matters/number-steps-day-more-important-step-intensity.

“FastStats: Sleep in Adults.” Sleep, 15 May 2024, www.cdc.gov/sleep/data-research/facts-stats/adults-sleep-facts-and-stats.html#:~:text=The%20basics%201%20BRFSS%20is%20a%20survey%20of,than%207%20hours%20are%3A%20Getting%20insufficient%20sleep.%20.

